Position summary

The Temporal Ecology Lab focuses on how global climate change is altering plants and plant communities locally, regionally and globally. Recent research in our lab has examined how climate change has advanced the timing of plants' leafout and flowering across diverse ecosystems. This summer work will focus on examining phenology (phenology is the timing of recurring life-history events, i.e., leafout, flowering) from long-term data on native woody plants, processing and analyzing tree cores for previous growth, as well as a meta-analysis on seed germination. The laboratory is hiring undergraduate students to join the lab and directly contribute to the projects of graduate students, as well as collaborative projects in the lab.

Duties

The student’s duties and responsibilities will include:

1. Assisting the lab (PI and graduate students) in greenhouse experiment set-up and maintenance
2. Monitoring plant phenologies, including budburst and leafout
3. Learning the phenological stages (i.e., budburst and leafout) of native woody plants (after training and with close supervision)
4. Learning basic tree ring science and assisting with the tree core processing

5. Help with fieldwork on collecting plant samples and field survey (not mandatory)
6. Help clean data on seed germination and cross-reviewing other students' cleaning code
7. Learning and implementing basic data quality standards for entering and cleaning data
8. To communicate their findings and share experiences via the lab's blog and website.

Supervision

The student will be directly supervised by the principle investigator (Dr. Wolkovich) and graduate students, both while in the lab and working on data cleaning (in the lab or elsewhere, depends on student preferences). The graduate students will provide an active and engaging environment for the work-learn student and will meet with the student regularly (sometimes every day, depending on the activity, but at least once every other week) and will be available to answer questions as they come up. The PI will also meet with the Work-Learn student at the start and end of each term and otherwise every two weeks or as needed.

The goals of the meetings with the direct supervisor or Dr. Wolkovich are multiple and include: (1) to discuss the Work-Learn student’s and lab’s current goals (making sure the student understands the scientific aims and reasons for all tasks), (2) check-in regarding training, review methods as needed, and provide feedback to the student as work proceeds, (3) handle any issues that come up and require discussion/supervision and, (4) at the end of the Work-Learn period discuss continuing opportunities in the lab and the student researcher’s longer-term (e.g., career) goals.

The Work-Learn student will be invited to participate in lab meeting and other lab activities. Through this position, the student will have the opportunity to better understand the process of conducting ecological research, including experimental design, data collection and archiving, and analysis, while also building diverse professional connections and skills through interactions with researchers and national park employees at field sites.

Complexity

The student is expected to learn (1) basic data entry and data cleaning standards and methods; (2) basic methods to monitor plant growth and experiment protocols; (3) basic tree ring science techniques. Generally the PI or a graduate student will always be available to check and confirm any identification for data in the lab or when transcribing data.

These tasks require attention, training and focus but are not overly complex, once trained. All students trained in these methods in our lab in the past have been able to master them after training, and the skills are transferrable to other lab and field activities. For all these tasks Work-Learn students will be provided with step-by-step instructions and will have constant training and supervision for the first few days of any tasks. Someone is always available to answer questions and provide additional guidance.

